Takeaway 1: Increasingly automated AI R&D is a potential source of major
strategic surprise. While experts disagree on likelihood, scenarios are possible in
which AI R&D becomes highly automated, the pace of AI R&D accelerates
dramatically, and the resulting systems pose extreme risks. This warrants
preparatory action now.

Takeaway 2: Frontier AI companies are already using AI to accelerate AI R&D,
and usage is increasing as AI models get more advanced. New models are often
used internally to advance AI R&D before they are released to the public.

Takeaway 3: Experts’ views differ on how rapid and impactful AI R&D
automation is likely to be. Even if the use of AI in AI R&D continues to increase,
there is no consensus on whether AI progress is more likely to accelerate or
plateau. What’s more, because different views are associated with different
assumptions about how AI R&D works, new data on how AI R&D automation is
progressing in practice may be insufficient to resolve conflicting perspectives. It
thus may be difficult to either detect or rule out extreme ‘intelligence explosion’
scenarios in advance.

Takeaway 4: Despite challenges in interpreting new evidence, better access to
indicators of progress in AI R&D automation would be valuable. Existing
empirical evidence, including existing benchmark evaluations, is insufficient for
measuring, understanding, and forecasting the trajectory of automated AI R&D.
More systematic collection of existing indicators—as well as developing ways of
gathering new indicators—could provide a significantly clearer picture.

Takeaway 5: Thoughtfully designed transparency efforts could improve access
to valuable empirical information about AI R&D automation, which at present
is almost fully dependent on patchy, voluntary releases of information from
companies. While some early transparency mandates on frontier AI development
have recently been enacted, they do not focus on indicators related to automating
AI R&D. Policymakers have a range of options for how to increase visibility of
these indicators.